Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is
the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on the
theme of “Young American Outlaws”.
In this series, we’ll explore the
lives of young Americans whose
crimes–or perhaps simply actions–have
become deeply politicised.
First up, in today’s episode,
we’ll talk about Ross Ulbricht,
the founder of the world’s biggest
drug marketplace, The Silk Road.
Next up, we’ll talk about Aaron
Swartz, the teen prodigy and
internet freedom activist who
got on the wrong side of the FBI.
And then in part three, the final part,
we will talk about the ongoing case
of Luigi Mangione, the man accused of
murdering the CEO of United Healthcare,
one of the largest health insurance
providers in the United States.
OK then, let’s not waste
another minute and get into the
amazing story of Ross Ulbricht.
The professional network LinkedIn
is not typically a place for
provocative political statements.
If you look at someone’s LinkedIn page,
they might describe themselves as “a
passionate sales leader with 10+ years
of experience in the pharmaceutical
industry”, or “operations manager with
team leadership experience”, or all manner
of other, corporate-style sentences.
In the case of one man, his LinkedIn
page read slightly differently.
When FBI officers stumbled across the
LinkedIn page for one Ross Ulbricht,
they found it to read, “I want to use
economic theory as a means to abolish
the use of coercion and agression amongst
mankind,” followed by. “To that end, I
am creating an economic simulation to
give people a first-hand experience of
what it would be like to live in a world
without the systemic use of force.”
It was an important clue as to the
identity of the person behind what
was at the time the world’s largest
illegal online marketplace for drugs,
weapons, pornography, and, in fact,
practically anything: The Silk Road.
Ulbricht first had the idea for
such a marketplace shortly after
finishing university at Penn State.
He had always been a smart student
and managed to get excellent
grades without doing too much work.
But after graduating, he found
real life to be not quite as easy.
He tried day trading, buying and
selling stocks, as well as starting
a video game company, but neither
of those ideas had worked out.
He then set up an online
second-hand bookstore with a
friend, based in Austin, Texas.
They would buy second-hand books en masse,
and sell them on other marketplaces.
It was a moderate success.
It never made much money, but it did
teach the then 26-year-old some boring but
important skills: things like inventory
management, pricing, customer service, and
the basics of running an online business.
And it was while working on this
project that Ulbricht had another idea.
It was for a marketplace that would
provide complete anonymity, allowing
buyers and sellers to transact
anonymously, without the website
or any snooping authorities being
able to identify anyone involved.
And this wasn’t just a business
idea; it was strongly aligned
with Ulbricht’s political beliefs.
He was a libertarian and a strong
admirer of the Austrian philosopher
and economist Ludwig von Mises.
The Austrian School of economics argues,
essentially, that the most effective
economic system is one based on free
markets and voluntary exchange, with
minimal government interference.
It holds that individuals act rationally
to pursue their goals, and that central
planning or state intervention distorts
prices and leads to inefficiency.
In other words, the most efficient
system is one where individuals
are left to do what they want,
without any state interference.
Ulbricht’s idea of a website that allowed
users complete anonymity fitted right
in with this political philosophy.
Now, it wasn’t, and still isn’t,
particularly difficult to access the
internet anonymously - there are plenty
of ways of hiding your IP address
and so on, so it’s fairly trivial
to access a website anonymously.
The problem was related to payments.
There was no reliable way for
one stranger to pay another.
Card transactions could be traced,
as they were linked to your identity.
Sending cash through the mail was
inherently risky, as the recipient
could claim they didn’t receive
it, or the sender might claim
it was sent when it never was.
And saying “meet me behind this petrol
station at 10 pm and I’ll hand over
the cash” wasn’t exactly ideal either.
But Ulbricht had discovered something
that solved this problem: Bitcoin.
Bitcoin, as you probably know, is a
cryptocurrency that can be sent digitally
from one address to another without either
party’s true identity being revealed.
It was perfect.
Every transaction was public, so nobody
could say, “I didn’t get it”, and it
was also practically anonymous, meaning
nobody–not the seller, not the buyer,
not the authorities–nobody would be
able to see the true identity of the
individuals involved in the transaction.
Ulbricht got to work building
the first version of the website.
He built it on the Tor network,
which is essentially an encrypted
layer of the internet that makes it
impossible to trace individual users.
It took him several months, and he
did it in complete secrecy, telling
only his girlfriend at the time.
He had a vision for this big marketplace
where anyone could buy anything, but he
knew he needed to start with one product.
Any online marketplace has this
chicken-and-egg problem: if a buyer
comes to it and sees there’s nothing
for sale, they’ll leave, and if there
are no buyers, then no sellers will
bother listing anything for sale.
So, Ulbricht started with something he
knew there would be demand for: drugs,
and in particular, magic mushrooms.
He grew the first mushrooms himself,
then listed them for sale on his website.
Given that he was going to be
selling drugs, he couldn’t exactly do
advertising or market his website in
any way, so he had to get creative.
He posted on a bunch of internet
forums related to drug use, purporting
to be just a user, with posts
like “has anyone used this website
Silk Road? Looks interesting.”.
The website went live in February
of 2011, and soon enough,
the orders came rolling in.
And he was fulfilling them all himself.
Just like he had done with the
second-hand books, he would take
the order, package it up, print off
the address and pop it in the post.
It started relatively slowly, but sure
enough, sellers started listing their
own products for sale: cannabis, MDMA,
cocaine, heroin, as well as all sorts
of prescription drugs, available without
a doctor’s prescription, of course.
The website was structured in a very
similar way to a site like eBay or Amazon.
Sellers could upload pictures of their
goods, a description of what was for
sale, and the price, payable in Bitcoin.
As for buyers, they could scroll
through the website, perusing different
drugs, reading reviews and ratings,
before deciding which one to go for.
They would make their purchase, in
Bitcoin of course, then a few days
or weeks later, they would receive a
package through the mail which would
contain the drugs they had ordered.
They would take the drugs, and then, being
good internet citizens, they would leave
a review: “really good batch”, or “the
pink ones aren’t as strong as the blue
ones”, or simply, “great communication,
A+ seller, will buy again!”.
Now, before we get into any discussion
of the morality of this, it was
clearly a very good business: in the
United States alone, there are 37
million active illegal drug users.
And the nature of drug use and drug
addiction is that it is, almost
by definition, a repeat purchase.
Buy, use, buy, use, buy, use.
The Silk Road facilitated this
transaction, making ordering whatever
drug you wanted as easy as clicking
a few buttons on your computer.
The website took a fee, of course, which
ranged from 8 to 15% of the transaction
value, but for sellers, this was a
small price to pay for the convenience.
Later that year, in 2011, the website
caught the eye of an eager journalist
at the now-defunct blog Gawker.
He published an article titled,
“The Underground Website Where
You Can Buy Any Drug Imaginable”.
It led to a flood of interest in the
site, and other journalists started
writing up their own articles too.
All this time, Ulbricht was managing
the site himself, doing everything
from fixing bugs to negotiating with
hackers to providing customer service.
It was consuming his life,
and his long-time girlfriend
decided enough was enough.
She gave him an ultimatum:
it’s me or the website.
Ulbricht chose the website.
By this time, the Silk Road had become
more than just a place to buy drugs.
There was a real sense of community, of
users being part of something that was
bigger than a place to buy marijuana.
This was a true libertarian paradise, a
place where people were allowed to make
their own choices about what to buy and
what to put into their bodies without
the government poking its nose in.
Ulbricht was completely happy for people
to use the website to buy drugs; he
had smoked a lot of pot as a teenager;
that was his decision, and he felt
no responsibility to stop people from
buying or selling any kind of drug.
However, as the website got more and
more popular, he started to see things
for sale that he found more problematic.
Guns with scratched-off serial numbers,
for example, weapons that were clearly
intended to be used for murder.
He justified this in the name of
freedom of choice, of the free
market, but then things got darker.
People started to list things like
child pornography and individuals
to be sold as sex slaves–things
that even the most devoted of
libertarians knew were a step too far.
These listings would be removed, but it
wasn’t always particularly easy to do.
In these cases, sellers would typically
disguise what was really for sale:
there would be no direct mention of
pornography, but instead normal pictures,
cryptic code, codewords, so it was
identifiable to a buyer who knew what
they were looking for, but harder for
anyone else to know what was going on.
And, as you might expect, the site
had garnered the attention of the
authorities: the FBI, the DEA, and the
IRS, who were crawling all over it.
The problem was that
it seemed unbreakable.
It was anonymous, you never knew who the
sellers were, and even if a buyer's home
address was identified, they could simply
say they didn’t know anything about the
package, and it must have been a mistake.
Being sent drugs in the post, if there is
no way of proving that you bought them,
would not stand up in a court of law.
But while this anonymity made
prosecutions difficult, it also
gave federal agents an opening.
They could pose as Silk Road customers,
or even sellers, blending into
the marketplace like anyone else.
And in so doing, they discovered that the
person pulling the strings behind it all
went by the name Dread Pirate Roberts.
Now, Dread Pirate Roberts isn’t a
name that came from nowhere; it comes
from the novel The Princess Bride,
and is the title that is passed
down from one person to another.
It seemed like it was a clever choice
of pseudonym, meaning that if the user
acting as Dread Pirate Roberts was
ever caught, he or she could claim that
they weren’t the person really behind
it; they had merely assumed the role.
Dread Pirate Roberts wasn’t
a person; it was a title.
And by the start of 2013, so two
years into The Silk Road, there were
federal agents all over the website.
Some had even gained administrative
privileges and were helping with customer
support, while others were simply sitting
there, watching what was going on.
But the true identity of Dread
Pirate Roberts was still a mystery.
There were a few clues: one agent went
back to those first posts about the
Silk Road from 2011, and saw that some
had come from the username “altoid”.
Further digging found posts on different
forums from a user with this username,
and then one in which he asked a
programming question about Tor using
his own name–Ross Ulbricht–before
quickly changing it to “Frosty”.
By mid-2013, the authorities were certain
that Ross Ulbricht was Dread Pirate
Roberts, but they couldn’t exactly knock
on his door and ask him politely if he
was indeed the man behind The Silk Road.
Yes, he had made some slipups,
but they knew that he took
security extremely seriously.
He would have all sorts of safeguards
in place so that any evidence linking
him to The Silk Road would be heavily
encrypted, and he would probably have
“kill buttons” on his laptop to delete
any evidence if he sensed that law
enforcement authorities were closing in.
They knew they had to catch him in the
act, with his laptop open and unlocked.
In the authorities' favour was
that he tended to work from public
places, as using a public WiFi
network gave him greater deniability.
Although he had spent much of the
time he operated the Silk Road
on the road, travelling in places
like Southeast Asia, they had
tracked him down to San Francisco.
And on 1 October 2013, they pounced.
He was working on his laptop in a
quiet area of a public library in a
residential area of San Francisco.
He heard people arguing behind him, almost
like a fight was about to break out.
He turned around to see what was
going on, and before he knew it, he
had been bustled to the ground, his
laptop snatched away before he had
time to close the screen or press the
keyboard shortcut to delete everything.
It had all been a setup; the
arguing pair were federal agents.
He was arrested and charged
with all manner of crimes.
The trial started in January of 2015,
and he stood accused of all sorts
of things that were more than merely
running a libertarian marketplace.
These included money laundering, as well
as ordering the contract killings of
five people who had threatened Silk Road.
Now, I should add that these killings
didn’t take place; it seemed that
he'd been scammed, but the prosecution
alleged that the intent was there.
He had paid for people to be killed.
In May of that year, May of 2015, he
was formally sentenced to double life
imprisonment without the possibility
of parole, plus he had to pay back just
under $200 million from his illicit gains.
He was only 30 years old.
Now, when this sentence was
announced, it was greeted with
a mixture of horror and praise.
To his libertarian supporters, he was
a scapegoat; he had created an online,
safer version of what people do in
the real world, and were doing in
the street outside the San Francisco
library where he had been arrested.
He hadn’t forced anyone to buy or
sell drugs, weapons, or anything.
And as to the accusations of the
contract killings, they said these
had been invented by the authorities.
But to anti-drug campaigners and many
politicians, this was a great victory.
He had made hundreds of millions of
dollars from drug addiction, violence, and
by creating a website that enabled some
of the most vile behaviours imaginable.
Yes, he was guilty, yes, he knew the
risks, and yes, he deserved to spend
the rest of his life behind bars.
And he would most likely have spent
the rest of his life in prison
had he not found an unlikely ally.
On January 21st, 2025, on his second day
back in office, Donald Trump gave Ross
Ulbricht a full and unconditional pardon.
On the campaign trail, he had promised
Libertarian voters that he would free
Ulbricht, and on the day he announced it,
he posted that, “the scum that worked to
convict him were some of the same lunatics
who were involved in the modern-day
weaponisation of government against me”
So, today, after 11 years behind
bars, Ross Ulbricht is a free man.
His case, and the debate about his
sentence, became about more than
him as an individual; it became
about the role of government, the
individual’s right to choose, and
the society we want to live in.
Where do we draw the line between
personal freedom to choose and the
government’s obligation to protect?
Should someone be punished for building
the tool, or only for how others use it?
Was Ulbricht sentenced for what he
did, or for what he represented?
In the end, was he a dangerous
criminal, a victim of the system,
or its most dangerous critic?
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on Ross Ulbricht and The Silk Road.
As always, I would love
to know your thoughts.
Do you think he deserved to
walk free, or do you think he
should still be behind bars?
Just head to community.leonardoenglish.com
and get chatting away
with other curious minds.
And as a final quick reminder, this
was part one of the mini-series
on “young American outlaws”.
Next up, we’ll be talking about
Aaron Swartz, the boy genius and
co-founder of Reddit, whose crusade
for internet freedom brought him up
against the FBI, and cost him his life.
And then in part three, we will be talking
about the current case of Luigi Mangione,
the young man who stands accused of
murdering the CEO of one of America’s
largest healthcare insurance companies.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.